In this video, we're going
to look at how we can use
value-based conditional
formatting to
highlight specific criteria
in our worksheets.
For example, Rowan
would like to identify
the five lowest incidence
of coal waste production.
We're going to select the data,
come to Conditional Formatting
and come to Top/Bottom Rules.
These basically
allow us to select
a top or bottom band
within our data.
We want the bottom 10 items,
but we're not locked into 10.
We're going to actually
make that five.
By default, it shows as red
fill with dark red text,
but there are other presets
you can choose from.
If you don't like any of them,
you can come to Custom
Format and define your own.
We're just going to go through
a green fill and say "OK".
Very easy to apply.
If our data changes,
if I make the zero,
you'll see the
conditional formatting
immediately responds,
going to undo that change,
Ctrl Z and we're back.
Now one problem that can creep
into our data that can be
a real issue is duplicate values.
Conditional formatting can help
us identify any duplicates.
For example, I'm going to
select my states or territories.
I'm going to come to
Conditional Formatting,
come to Highlight Cell Rules,
and here you see you get a
really rich set of options.
We're going to click on duplicate
values near the bottom.
Oh dear, we do have duplicates.
That could've been
really embarrassing.
I'm going to select from
B10 all the way to J10
because that's my duplicate,
and I'm just going to
press delete. Easy fix.
Now let's look at something
even more specific.
I'm going to scroll down.
Rowan wants to identify
all the recycling rates
that are below 48 percent.
With selecting our
recycling data,
come to Conditional Formatting,
come to Highlight Cell Rules.
We're going to choose Less Than,
and type 48 percent and
click "Enter" to apply.
We have quite a lot of
options and they're
very quick and easy to apply.
There is one potential downside
with the one we've just used.
If Rowan decided he want to see
all the recycling rates
below 50 percent,
he would need to go and
change the conditional
formatting.
Now in this particular case,
he's absolutely certain it
will always be 48 percent.
So it's not a concern.
But sometimes, we want
the conditional
formatting rule to be
based on a value that's
in our worksheet.
This, first of all,
documents [inaudible] but
also makes it far
more interactive.
Here's an interesting example.
Rowan has included a map in
the data and a drop-down list
showing all the states
and territories.
You may recall from
the previous calls,
we can create a drop-down
list using data validation.
If he selects a different state,
he wants the cells behind
the map to highlight
in a different color.
You'll see we've now
highlighted the northern
territory's region.
He wants to do this using
conditional formatting.
Let's start by moving
our map out of
the way so we can actually
see the cells behind.
We've actually labeled
each of the cells.
What our conditional
formatting needs to
do is to check if
the label above the
cell we want to
highlight is equal
to the selection,
then we're going to
change the color.
But for this, we're actually
going to need a formula.
Make sure you've
got O11 selected.
Come up to Conditional
Formatting.
We're going to come
down to New Rule.
The New Rule dialog gives us
complete creative control
over our conditional formatting.
So we could define our
own two-color scale,
we could define our own data bar.
But what we're most interested in
here is using a formula.
We're going to click
"Use a formula",
and then we're going to
click into the formula Bar.
Now all formulas
began with an equals,
so we're going to type equals,
and then we're going
to select O10.
We want to check if this cell
contains the same value as K1.
But you'll notice it's put an
absolute cell referencing,
and we don't want that
because in a moment,
we're going to copy this
format to the other cells.
I'm just going to press F4
three times to turn that off.
Now, I'm going to type my
equals and I'm going to check
if this cell is equal to K1.
Here, we do want the
absolute cell reference.
We don't get a default format,
so we're going to click
our "Format" button
and you can change
your number format,
font, border or fill
or all of the above.
We're going to make it any
color in the top rows,
sticking with our color palette,
and we're going to say, "OK",
and "OK" again, and
it is now changed.
I don't really want to repeat
that seven times though,
and I don't have to.
You can copy
conditional formatting,
and you can do it using
conventional copy paste methods,
but there's a really
efficient option
called the Format Painter.
Making sure you've
still got O11 selected,
we are going to come
up to Format Painter.
One click gives you one copy.
Double-click gives
you multiple copies.
So we're going to double-click.
When you bring your cursor
back into the workbook,
you should see a
paintbrush attached.
Now we're going to apply it
to our Queensland cells.
That's going to be P11.
It doesn't change because
this value is still empty,
but we'll check it very shortly.
Now, Western Australia
actually straddles two cells.
So we're going to click on
N15 and then drag up to N14,
similar for South Australia,
and just complete the rest.
When you're done, click to turn
the Format Painter
off or press escape.
Now let's put our
map back into place,
just making sure that
the black circles
line up nicely with
the white circles.
You can use your arrow keys to
budget into position
if you need to.
Let's go and test it.
Coming back to our dropdown,
I'm going to change NT to WA.
That worked very nicely.
Let's try another one.
Tasmania. Fantastic. We've looked
quite a few options for adding
conditional formatting.
There's some great
efficient built-in options.
But if you want real
creative control,
you can add your own conditional
format using a rule.
In the next video, we're
going to look at how we can
apply conditional formatting
to an entire row.
We're also going to
introduce macros to
make our workbooks even more
interactive and automated.